---
title: "Payment Gateways: Stripe"
slug: "payment-gateways"
---

Everybody, eventually, has got to get paid. And the web is no different.

Generally online payments are conducted using credit and debit cards. More recently people have learned to accept cryptocurrencies as well, but accepting crypto is for a future lesson if and when these electronic currencies become more widely used.

There are laws around saving credit card information, called **PCI Compliance**. PCI Compliance means having various standards of encryption, security, and controls around a database system. Most companies do not want to maintain their own PCI Compliance, so they outsource it to services called **Payment Processors** like stripe.com and braintreepayments.com.

In this tutorial we'll be using Stripe to process payments to buy some pets.

# Make A Plan

1. Sign up for Stripe and get our public/private access keys
1. Add the drop in stripe checkout
1. Add `stripe` middleware for interacting with the stripe API.
1. Process the payment on the server
1. Save when the pet was purchased and by whom

# Stripe

Head over to [Stripe's Payments](https://stripe.com/us/payments) page and create an account.

# Drop In Stripe Checkout

To simplify this implementation, we are going to use Stripe's "Checkout" product that creates a high quality checkout experience with very little code.

[Stripe Quickstart Docs](https://stripe.com/docs/quickstart)

The Checkout code will take the user's credit/debit card information. It won't actually complete the payment though. It will just send that information to Stripe and get a token back.  To complete the payment, we'll have to send the token the Checkout code generates to our  server to actually complete the payment. Making a payment is called a `charge` in Stripe's DSL (Domain Specific Language).

Here's all you have to add to your html to add Checkout (HTML above, pug below).

```html
<form action="your-server-side-code" method="POST">
  <script
    src="https://checkout.stripe.com/checkout.js" class="stripe-button"
    data-key="pk_test_TYooMQauvdEDq54NiTphI7jx"
    data-amount="999"
    data-name="Stripe.com"
    data-description="Widget"
    data-image="https://stripe.com/img/documentation/checkout/marketplace.png"
    data-locale="auto"
    data-zip-code="true">
  </script>
</form>
```

```pug
form(action='your-server-side-code', method='POST')
  script.stripe-button(src='https://checkout.stripe.com/checkout.js',
                       data-key='pk_test_TYooMQauvdEDq54NiTphI7jx',
                       data-amount='999',
                       data-name='Stripe.com',
                       data-description='Widget',
                       data-image='https://stripe.com/img/documentation/checkout/marketplace.png',
                       data-locale='auto',
                       data-zip-code='true')
```

Drop this in, reload, and click the button.

### Customizing the Checkout Widget

What should replace `/your-server-side-code`? What should we name that route? This would not be a strict RESTful and Resourceful route, but we should do our best to follow these conventions.

Let's use POST verb, but we're creating something associated with a Pet. So probably our best bet is `/pets/:id/purchase`.

Now add your public API key. You can either just paste in your public test API key. Or to get fancy you can set it into your `.env` file under `PUBLIC_STRIPE_API_KEY`, and then use `app.locals` to pass it forward into your template. To do this add

```js
// app.js
app.locals.PUBLIC_STRIPE_API_KEY = process.env.PUBLIC_STRIPE_API_KEY
```

Then call `data-key=PUBLIC_STRIPE_API_KEY` in your Checkout widget.

Is the amount ok? Let's just leave 999 in there for now. Notice that it is in cents?

Now change the name to Proud Pete's Pet Emporium.

### Test Checkout

Now you can submit the test credit card number `4242 4242 4242 4242`. [Stripe Quickstart Docs](https://stripe.com/docs/quickstart)

Make the purchase endpoint, so you can log to the console the request's body to see what we are getting back.

# Add Stripe Middleware & Process the Payment on the Server

To complete a charge you need to send two tokens to the Stripe API:

1. A valid Checkout token (generated by Checkout on front end)
1. Private Stripe API Key (like your app's Stripe password)

With these two pieces of info we can verify a charge in the Stripe system and get the moneys.

So we have the Checkout token being sent to the `/pets/:id/purchase` route. And we should add the Private Stripe API keys in our environmental config variables in `process.env`.

So now we need to initiate a charge using the Stripe API. To do this we'll use the [stripe](https://www.npmjs.com/package/stripe) API wrapper called `stripe` (maintained by Stripe).

Here's an example Stripe charge:

```js
// Set your secret key: remember to change this to your live secret key in production
// See your keys here: https://dashboard.stripe.com/account/apikeys
var stripe = require("stripe")("sk_test_4eC39HqLyjWDarjtT1zdp7dc");

// Token is created using Checkout or Elements!
// Get the payment token ID submitted by the form:
const token = request.body.stripeToken; // Using Express

const charge = stripe.charges.create({
  amount: 999,
  currency: 'usd',
  description: 'Example charge',
  source: token,
});
```

Use the above code and add it to your `/pets/:id/purchase` route. Be sure to customize the Stripe Secret API Key

Once the payment has gone through, redirect people back to the pets#show route.

### Testing A Purchase

Once your route is wired up, send in a test from the Checkout code from the browser.

Now check your stripe dashboard to see if the payment went through.

### Further Customization: Price & Description

It is clear now that the Pet model needs another attribute: a price. Add this as an integer called `price`. Can you set it in the seed.js and rerun it to see the database.

Also update the new and edit form to include `price`.

Now customize the `/pets/:id/purchase` to include the price. **Reminder** - multiply the price by 100 to get the price in cents.

Make the description the Pet's name and species.

# Save Who Bought the Pet

Now that the pet is saved, we better mark that the pet was saved by setting the current date and time on a new pet attribute: `purchased_at`.

Now mark all pets that are purchased as "Purchased!" in green text (using boostrap's `text-success` class).

Also if a pet is purchased, do not show the Checkout button.
